Narrative Data Collection Methods: Excavating Stories
By: Jeong-Hee Kim
In:Understanding Narrative Inquiry: The Crafting and Analysis of Stories as Research
Chapter DOI:https://doi.org/10.4135/9781071802861.n5
Subject:Criminology and Criminal Justice, Education, Health, Nursing, Political Science and International Relations, Psychology, Social Work, Sociology, Medicine
Keywords:knowledge
Request Permissions icon link
Show page numbers
Narrative Data Collection Methods: Excavating Stories
Chapter Topics
Narrative Thinking
Interview Logistics
Informed Consent
Confidentiality
Sampling and Saturation
Trust and Rapport
Types of Qualitative Interview
Narrative Interviewing
Life Story Interview/Biographical Interview
Narrative Interview Phases
Narrative Interview Questions
Two-Sentence Format Technique
Fieldwork
Gaining Access to the Research Field
The Art of Observation—Also Known as Attention
Observer’s Paradox
Artifacts: Cabinets of Curiosities or Cabinets of Wonder
Visual Data
(Digital) Archival Data
Conclusion: Excavating Stories as Data
Questions to Consider
What are the ways to collect narrative data?
What are the techniques for narrative interviewing?
How do we gain access to our research site?
Introduction
Bryan comes to my office without warning. He seems quite distressed. Puzzled, I ask, “What’s wrong?” Bryan ignores my question, but apologizes for showing up without an appointment. I convince him not to worry about it and ask him to shoot. Bryan tells me he had an interview that yielded nothing interesting. The interview was short; the interviewee was neither talkative nor enthusiastic about the interview. Bryan tells me what bothers him the most, though, is his lack of confidence in his interview skills. He didn’t know what questions to ask or how to ask them in order to get an interesting story out of his interviewee. There were awkwardly silent moments between him and the interviewee. His questions were not conducive to lengthy answers. The interview ended up much shorter than he anticipated. He tried to ask questions hoping that he would get some stories from the interview but ended up getting short, fragmented answers. When Bryan finally pauses for a long sigh, I reach for my jacket and ask Bryan to go for a walk with me. “Bryan, let’s go get some coffee.”

I hear many trial-and-error stories like this from student researchers. Fieldwork to collect narrative data does not always go as planned. To minimize those disappointing experiences, we need to hone the skills and techniques required of narrative inquirers doing fieldwork. This chapter is about narrative research methods that will help us collect various types of narrative data based on which we reconstruct or retell stories. The objective of this chapter is, therefore, to prepare you for the research fieldwork you will engage in as a way to excavate stories.

Narrative Thinking
In Chapter 3, we discussed learning to think narratively as a part of the aesthetic play of narrative research design. We as “researcher-storytellers” (Barone, 2007, p. 468) should think narratively, imagining a lifespace, living and telling as starting points for collecting field texts, balancing the commonplaces (temporality, sociality, and place), and investing ourselves in the inquiry (Connelly & Clandinin, 2006). Now, to avoid an interview that yields not much data, like Bryan’s case above, we should help our participants (participant-storytellers) think narratively as well by encouraging them to be involved in narrative thinking.

What, then, is narrative thinking? Narrative thinking is a method of making a story out of experience, “a heuristic process that requires skill, judgment, and experience” (Robinson & Hawpe, 1986, p. 111). Robinson and Hawpe argue that storytelling involves narrative thinking in which we reflect upon our experiences to construct stories. In other words, narrative thinking is an attempt to create a fit between a situation and a story schema about some experience or event that consists of who, what, how, and why. It describes the flow of events and actions. We employ narrative thinking to understand and analyze how past events and actions led to a past outcome, and to imagine what actions to carry out to achieve future ends (Polkinghorne, 2010). Hence, narrative thinking is a method of creating a story by organizing experiences around our perception, thought, memory, and imagination. It seems paramount, then, for narrative researchers to understand what narrative thinking is before learning narrative methods regarding how to excavate stories.

According to Robinson and Hawpe (1986), three components are involved in the process of narrative thinking: the narrative schema, the storyteller’s prior knowledge and experience, and a diverse array of cognitive strategies. The narrative schema is an implicit procedural plan that organizes certain types of essential information, linking them by means of causal relations. That is, the storyteller maps out a story situation and structure using the narrative schema that consists of a series of questions to be answered, such as, what happened?, to whom?, why?, and so on (p. 115). These questions require the storyteller to examine the information available about an incident, identifying relevant facts, which then become part of the narrative schema. This narrative schema is, of course, drawn from the second component of narrative thinking, which is the storyteller’s prior knowledge and experience. And then, the storyteller utilizes the third component, cognitive strategies, which include selecting, comparing, inferring, arranging, and revising the past knowledge and experiences. These cognitive strategies play a pivotal role in narrative thinking, as they guide the storyteller’s judgment about which details are relevant in the creation of a story.

An act of narrative thinking, elicited through these three components—the storyteller’s narrative schema, his or her prior knowledge and experience, and cognitive strategies—yields a story that facilitates an understanding of the actions of others and oneself in relation to others. According to Robinson and Hawpe (1986), narrative thinking is a heuristic device that allows open-endedness, construction, and varying kinds of uncertainty, through which stories are created as “natural mediators between the particular and the general in human experience” (p. 124).

We can further link the components of narrative thinking with two narrative principles proposed by Chase (2003). The first principle is that narration is a major way in which people make sense of experience, construct the self, and create and communicate meaning. And the second principle is that personal narratives are unavoidably social in character, no matter how unique and individual the narratives are.

Our narrative research will be enhanced when narrative thinking and narrative principles are incorporated into our narrative inquiry methods, as these help us excavate stories. Such methods include interviews, fieldwork through observation or participant observation, visual and archival data, and artifacts in a cabinet of curiosities. As we collect narrative data, we should consider narrative thinking grounded in the narrative principles as a foundation for data collection methods for narrative inquiry, which will differentiate narrative methods from general qualitative methods.

Interview Logistics
Interviews provide unique insights into the complex lives of individuals in a society. Individual interviews are the most commonly used data collection method in qualitative research and the foremost method in narrative inquiry in particular, as we understand that our interviewees will tell stories based on their narrative schema that reflects personal knowledge and experiences arranged by their cognitive strategies.

Undergirding the use of the interview is the premise that the individual person is an important source of knowledge (Gubrium, Holstein, Marvasti, & McKinney, 2012). Much of what we claim to know about individuals’ beliefs, values, and feelings in particular social contexts will be based on our interviewees’ responses to questions we ask them during interviews. Mishler (1986a) writes, “No significant aspect of life has been beyond the pale of inquisitive interviewers” (p. 233). This statement goes to show how critical it is for us to have good interview skills that can evoke responses meaningful enough to generate stories that inform our research purposes and research questions. Hence, a good understanding of the interview method will lead to conducting a successful narrative inquiry.

A basic attitude we should have toward interviews is that we are the knowledge seeker and our interviewee is the knowledge holder. Thus, our approach to narrative interviewing should be:

I want to understand the world from your point of view. I want to know what you know in the way you know it. I want to understand the meaning of your experience, to walk in your shoes, to feel things as you feel them, to explain things as you explain them. Will you become my teacher and help me understand? (Spradley, 1979, p. 34)

This humble and empathic approach acknowledges that it is an honor to be granted access to your interviewee’s life, insights, and viewpoints from which you intend to generate further knowledge to inform your field. The interview method involves some ethical and methodological issues, including informed consent, confidentiality, sample size, and data saturation, which will be discussed below.

Informed Consent
As we discussed in Chapter 3, human research constitutes a number of key ethical principles, most notably respect for human beings, integrity, beneficence, and justice (Heggen & Guillemin, 2012). The very first item you will need to prepare for your interview is a form that acknowledges understanding and grants informed consent, complying with ethical principles stipulated by your school’s Institutional Review Board (IRB). Information provided in requesting informed consent furnishes potential research participants with core information about your research study, including the purpose, duration, and methods of the research. It also states possible risks and benefits deriving from participation in the study. Moreover, it should be stated that the participant has the right to withdraw his or her consent at any time without any penalty. Hence, the notion of informed consent is grounded in the principles of confidentiality, individual autonomy, and beneficence (Marzano, 2012).

Confidentiality
Confidentiality is about protecting your research participant’s privacy. It refers to the agreement between the researcher and the research participant about what may be done with the interview data. It also ensures that no one other than the researcher knows who participated in a study and no one but the researcher has access to the interview data (Kaiser, 2012). A number of strategies serve to protect participants’ confidentiality, including the use of pseudonyms rather than participants’ actual names and removing identifying features from research reports, as stated in the informed consent document.

However, the issue of confidentiality is not as straightforward as it seems. We may encounter some difficulties in protecting the identities of our participants, as we provide detailed descriptions of the participants as well as research context. During this process, a breach of confidentiality may occur when the traits and experiences of individuals make them identifiable in research reports despite the use of pseudonyms, a situation that is called deductive disclosure (Kaiser, 2012). For example, Baez (2002) interviewed minority faculty members at a predominantly White university about promotion and tenure experiences (e.g., experiences of isolation, racism, betrayal, and sexism). Baez was concerned about the possibility that these accounts, if published, would cause his study participants to be identified by their colleagues, which could lead to retaliation or other negative career consequences. This kind of concern will arise more frequently when we engage in “backyard research” (Glesne & Peshkin, 1991), which is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8. Hence, we should be aware of the risks of breaching the confidentiality of our participants at every stage of a research project, not just at the start of the interview when we obtain informed consent.

What, then, should we do when we have a participant who shares private, sensitive, and critical information, but asks us not to share with others? This presents an “ethically important moment” (Guillemin & Gillam, 2004), which requires the use of our phronesis (ethical judgment) through reflexivity, as discussed in Chapter 3. Kaiser (2012) proposes two procedures that can be added to the end of the interview to deal with confidentiality issues that arise during the interview: First, we can ask our interviewees for permission to contact them in the future to discuss questions about their data. Second, we can use an end-of-interview document to obtain our interviewee’s specific wishes for data use and confidentiality. A post-interview confidentiality form is shown in Figure 5.1.

Figure 5.1 Post-Interview Confidentiality Form
(Adapted from Kaiser, 2012, p. 462)


icon downloadDownload Image as .jpg

Sampling and Saturation
The issue of sampling or sample size first refers to how researchers decide which informants and how many to include or exclude, which is a core concern for researchers to determine for a successful project (Johnson & Rowlands, 2012). My students frequently asked, “What is a good number of potential interviewees for narrative inquiry?” or “How many interviews should be conducted for each participant?” These are important questions that you will grapple with as you embark your research study. You will realize that it is not easy to determine how many people you need to interview in order to yield sufficiently meaningful data. Unless you clearly justify the number of interviewees (sample size), you will be challenged by one of your dissertation committee members or IRB personnel for an insufficient sample size, which is a typical target of criticism against qualitative research.

However, qualitative theorists have not been able to reach agreement on an optimal sample size1; for this reason, continual examination is required (Beitin, 2012). Beitin suggests that an appropriate sample size could range from 6 to 12 participants, provided there is thematic redundancy after 6 interview participants. Kvale (1996) suggests that the number of interviews in current interview studies tends to be around 15 ± 10, based on a combination of the time and resources available. If your focus is on collecting life stories, the sample of interviewees will usually be smaller and the interviewing may be a lengthy process. If your focus is on exploring themes across interviewees, the sample might be larger and each interview shorter.

However, if your purpose is to understand the world as experienced by one specific person, like writing a Bildungsroman, for example, you could rely on a single person. Let’s take an example from psychology. A paradox is that if you want to obtain general knowledge, you focus on a few intensive case studies. For instance, Freud claimed to derive a general knowledge of psychoanalysis from Dora’s case, a single case study. Piaget’s research on children’s cognitive development originated from studying his own children. Each case study involved immense amounts of time for observations and interviews of single individuals. Therefore, in determining a sample size for qualitative inquiry, and narrative inquiry in particular, an emphasis should be placed in the quality rather than the quantity of the interviews (Kvale, 1996). Kvale suggests a minimum of three rounds of open or in-depth life story interviews. Furthermore, according to O’Reilly and Parker (2012), the adequacy of the sample is not determined solely by the number of informants, but by the appropriateness of the data. Hence, our aim is to gather a sufficient depth of information from various types of data as a way of fully describing the phenomenon being studied, which is necessary for us to achieve richness and depth of analysis. Therefore, we have to be flexible and realistic in our approach not only to sampling and sample size, but also to the adequacy of sampling in addressing sufficiently our research purpose and the research questions.

How, then, do we know our sampling is adequate and enough? This question is associated with the notion of saturation, which is one of the quality markers of qualitative research. Guest, Bunce, and Johnson (2006) write, “Saturation has, in fact, become the gold standard by which purposive sample sizes are determined in health science research” (p. 60). We reach a point of saturation when new interview data do not yield any new knowledge but merely confirm or are redundant with what has been found in the existing data, or when the interviewee has exhausted all the relevant stories that she or he wanted to share (Suárez-Ortega, 2013). When we say saturation has been reached, it means that depth as well as breadth of information has been achieved. Yet this is not to say that the notion of saturation should be accepted without question. The truth is that qualitative phenomena that deal with human beings are organic and unique; there will always be new things that unfold, depending on your research topic. Hence, data can sometimes never be fully saturated, which is a conundrum for us.

Luckily, O’Reilly and Parker (2012) provide us with a promising explanation for this seeming dilemma. They advise that we need to be transparent about epistemological and methodological positions that have guided our decision-making process. We also need to be transparent about how and why we cannot reach saturation, which can refer to our limitations. O’Reilly and Parker also convince us that our transparency about limitations does not necessarily invalidate the research findings. If saturation is not reached, they state, “it simply means that the phenomenon has not yet fully explored rather than that findings are invalid” (p. 194).

Trust and Rapport
The most important aspect of the interview method is trust and rapport between the interviewer and the interviewee. Kvale (1996) postulates that interview is a way to create knowledge inter the points of view of the interviewer and the interviewee. It is a way of generating knowledge in which the knowledge evolves through human interaction and where you rely on your interviewee’s openness, trust, and generosity to share what he or she knows with you. Hence, your act of collecting stories via interview will depend on the level of trust and rapport in the relationship you have with your interviewee.

How do we build up trust and rapport with our participants? Grinyer and Thomas (2012), for example, discuss the value of multiple or longitudinal interviews, which play a critical role in establishing harmonious, trustworthy relationship (rapport) between the researcher and the research participants. As one example, they provide Cornwell’s study, which drew a distinction between “public” and “private” accounts of interview data. Grinyer and Thomas explain that Cornwell, who studied repeat interviews in the field of health and illness in East London, found out that the public accounts tended to be offered in the first interview when rapport between the interviewer and the interviewee was minimal. That is, the interviewee had a tendency of offering an account that he or she thought the interviewer wanted or expected to hear. However, the interview participants tended to offer their private (more interesting and meaningful) accounts in a second or subsequent interview because trust and familiarity with the researcher had been established. Although this does not mean that the first interview will not produce as much meaningful data as the following interviews, the point here is that the importance of rapport and a trustworthy relationship cannot be overemphasized in generating meaningful data. Depending on the quality of relationship we have with our interviewees, we might or might not gain data of high quality.

However, we also need to be warned against over-rapport. Goudy and Potter (1975), for example, argue that we should aim for an optimal level of rapport rather than maximal rapport. That is, when rapport is too high (the researcher and the participant are too close), there may be greater bias in the interview, obscuring the purpose of the interview. Thus, they argue, the purpose of the interview is not simply to establish rapport in and of itself, but to use rapport as a means to generate data of high quality. Darlington and Scott (2002) offer a great insight into this:

Rapport is often included in research texts as an entity that is established at the beginning of the research, and once this is done the researcher can get on with the business of researching. But rapport is not a finite commodity that can be turned on and off by the researcher. It is relational.... Like all relationships, the researcher-participant relationship is subject to continuing negotiation and reworking; this extends to the participant’s trust in the researcher’s behavior at every stage of the research. (p. 54)

It seems that there should be a happy medium regarding rapport. We cannot take it for granted that there will be a good relationship once we start our “business of researching.” Nor should we automatically assume that an extended (longitudinal) interaction with our participants will ensure desirable rapport and trust (Grinyer & Thomas, 2012).

To develop a trustworthy relationship, you the interviewer will need to be willing to open up as well. Your role as an interviewer is not that of a therapist or an interrogator, nor will you be a distanced listener. But, there is also a tension in qualitative research as to how much of themselves researchers should share with participants (Bondy, 2012). Although openness is expected, Bondy posits, researchers sometimes choose not to disclose parts of themselves, such as their sexual orientation, marital status, political views, and the like, to the participants, because they don’t want to bias the participants and have them tell the interviewer what they think he or she wants to hear. Hence, it is difficult to determine what an optimal level of rapport and trust is during the course of research. Central to the achievement of trust and rapport, therefore, is the researcher’s genuine caring, interest, and respect for the participant’s human dignity and integrity, as Shea (2000) states:

Everyone agrees that among the highest duties of academics is to make sure that the human beings they study—fellow citizens they probe, query, prod, and palpate—are treated with dignity and respect. (p. 28)

Types of Qualitative Interview
Now that we understand the ethics and logistics of interviewing, let’s take a look at interview methods. Interviews in qualitative research follow three broad categories in general: structured, semi-structured, and unstructured (open-ended). The main difference between them is the degree to which you as the researcher have control over the process and content of the interview (Corbin & Morse, 2003; Fontana & Frey, 1998). For narrative inquiry, the most typical types of interview are semi-structured and unstructured, open-ended interviews.

First, in structured (close-ended) interviews, you will have a set of pre-determined questions that you will follow exactly, with no flexibility. The general responses for this kind of interview are short answers, like an oral questionnaire. This type of interview can be good if you intend to collect specific answers on a particular theme from various interviewees. However, this method is considered a traditional survey interview and is not highly recommended for narrative researchers. In particular, Elliot Mishler heavily criticized this method, which I will discuss later.

In semi-structured interviews, you prepare general questions that you want to ask, but use them only to guide the interview, helping you maintain its focus rather than dictate its direction. These interviews are also called “guided interviews” or “guided conversations” in which you may prepare six to ten questions providing a general order to guide the course of the interview (Morse, 2012, p. 194). The questions are flexible enough to expand the scope of the interview, as they allow you to ask different but relevant questions depending on the interviewee’s responses. You have to think on your feet, so to speak, as you listen to your interviewee, while being sensitive to the content and nature of the interview as it progresses. Your interview skills, how attentive, sensitive, and responsive you are, will be critical in generating interviewee responses that yield meaningful data. Your interviewee may withhold important information simply because relevant questions are not asked, or he or she may answer in a perfunctory manner if your interview skills fall short.

In unstructured, open-ended interviews, which are sometimes referred to as narrative interviews, you the researcher usually have no set agenda other than to listen to whatever your interviewee wants to tell you, barring a tangential story totally unrelated to your research. You often ask just a “grand tour” question (Spradley, 1979) that presents the general topic to focus the participant. The interviewee tells his or her own story in his or her own way with minimal interruption from you. You primarily assume a listening stance because your goal is to obtain the participant’s perspective without “leading” (Morse, 2012). It is the interviewee, not you, who controls the content, including where to begin the narrative, what will and will not be disclosed, the scope of the interview, the order in which topics are introduced, the pacing of the interview, and the amount of detail. Your interviewee is the central actor who is telling story. However, this does not mean that you are merely a passive listener. You can play an active role through active listening, and by asking occasionally relevant questions for probing and clarifying during the course of the interview, as long as you are cautious enough not to make any intrusion that might alter it (Corbin & Morse, 2003; Fontana & Frey, 1998). In conducting a semi-structured or an open-ended interview, it is also important to be flexible enough to be prepared for an interview that may end up having less to do with prepared questions than with the exchange of stories. Narayan and George (2012) make a point about this matter:

How an interview runs its course depends very much on all the participants involved. It is important for the interviewer to be flexible and ready to follow the unexpected paths that emerge in the course of talking together with interviewees. (p. 515)

Therefore, when we encounter some unexpected stories, we should not make quick judgments or interpretations of what we hear, but maintain a critical stance toward the content, as Riessman (2012) notes:

Personal narratives can emerge at unexpected moments in research interviews, even in response to fixed-response questions. What may appear at the time to be an unrelated response can become important analytically, telling us a great deal about our interviewing practices and participants’ preferred topics. (p. 376)

Interviewer flexibility and open-mindedness are important because they will not only let unexpected data emerge but can also contribute to developing good rapport and trust. And delaying our judgments or interpretations of what appears to be irrelevant to the research topic can be beneficial in the long run.

Narrative Interviewing
So far, we have familiarized ourselves with the “hows” and “whats” of qualitative interviews in general, including various interview types (e.g., structured, semi-structured, and open-ended interview); logistics of interviewing (e.g., interview sampling, interview rapport, data saturation); and ethical issues of the interview (e.g., informed consent, protecting the interviewee’s confidentiality, and more). But this knowledge is shared with qualitative research in general. In this section, therefore, I’d like to discuss in more depth some aspects of interviewing that are especially pertinent to narrative inquiry.

When we engage in narrative thinking and narrative principles during our interviews, it is unproductive to conduct a survey or questionnaire type of interview in which questions and answers are viewed as “stimuli and responses rather than as forms of speech” (Mishler, 1986b, p. viii). An interview for narrative research that suppresses the interviewee’s personal stories embedded in social contexts is counter-productive, for those stories reveal how individuals perceive, organize, and give meaning to their understandings of themselves, their experiences, and the world. Our interviewees may tell interesting stories in response to overarching questions as long as we do not interrupt them. We might have the urge to apply external structure to the interview, but all we need to do in this case is to show engagement with nods or murmurs and be flexible enough to follow the lead of the interviewee while not losing sight of the focus. In the presence of such experienced storytellers, we may at times need to skillfully redirect the stories toward subjects suited to our specific interests.

Mishler (1986a) explains that “stories are a recurrent and prominent feature of respondents’ accounts in all types of interviews” (p. 235). Therefore, an interview needs to be designed in a way that it invites our interviewees to speak in their own voices, to express themselves freely, deciding where to start their story as well as the flow of the topics (creating their own narrative schema). Since the interview is an “invitation to narrate” (Narayan & George, 2012, p. 514), we should seize this wonderful opportunity to grasp the complexity of stories that may not be told otherwise. As discussed before, narratives are fluid and unexpected; we should let them emerge in the interviews.

In narrative interviewing, then, it is important to establish such a stance that an interviewer is an attentive listener and our interviewee is a narrator with narrative thinking. This stance is more important than the form and content of a particular question. That is, we are likely to find stories if we allow our interviewees to continue in their own way. The narrative inquirer’s job is to listen with attentive care and ask necessary questions that will further inspire the telling of stories. We are unlikely to find stories if we cut our storytellers off with new questions, which could signal that we are not listening to their stories (Mishler, 1986a). This is a conceptual shift away from the idea that “interviewees have answers to researchers’ questions” to the idea that “interviewees are narrators with stories to tell and voices of their own” (Chase, 2005, p. 660). Hence, we have to remember that:

Often, being a good interviewer for stories involves not just asking the right questions but sympathetically listening and holding questions back so that the person being interviewed can shape stories in his or her own way. Equally, being a good interviewer may involve responding to questions from an interviewee and so entering into a reciprocal exchange. (Narayan & George, 2012, p. 522)

In the traditional, standard practice of interview, like survey interviews or structured interviews, there is a striking asymmetry of power, tilted excessively toward the interviewer. In narrative interviewing, however, it is our interviewee, the narrator, who is the central actor, as discussed above. Before we conduct our interview, some critical questions we want to ask ourselves are: Whose interests are going to be served by the asymmetry of power between my interviewee and me? Who will benefit from my control of the interpretation, dissemination, and use of findings? If our goal is to let stories be told (as it should be), then giving up the power as an interviewer and empowering our storyteller instead is natural. Again, I want to remind you of what Spradley (1979) advised us (the quote cited at the beginning of this chapter).

Although narrative interviewing requires us to give up control and follow the interviewee’s leads, it does not mean that we should enter our interview empty-headed. That is, we should not lose sight of our research purposes and theoretical perspectives. It is also important to note that we maintain the standards of research regarding preparation for the interviews, and continue our commitment to ethics in practice (or everyday narrative ethics, discussed in Chapter 3), not to mention the previously mentioned ethical guidelines of approval from an Institutional Review Board (IRB) (Pederson, 2013). But most of all, the key to getting the best interview is our flexibility and ability to adapt to specific circumstances.

Life Story Interview/Biographical Interview
The purpose of the interview in narrative inquiry is to let stories be told, particularly the stories of those who might have been marginalized or alienated from the mainstream, and those whose valuable insights and reflections would not otherwise come to light. Although the way you approach narrative interview will depend on your overall research design, including the purpose of your research and research questions, narrative inquirers can usually begin with what we call a life story interview or biographical interview. This is the most common narrative interview we use, and it is based on the concept of one’s life story being a social construct comprising both social reality and a personal, experiential world (Rosenthal, 1993). This interview method, which is based on the unstructured, open-ended interview format, has become a central element of narrative inquiry used in a variety of disciplines as a way of carrying out an in-depth study of an individual life as a whole. I would posit that any narrative researcher could/should use the life story interview method as a basic research tool because not only the full life story but also some segments of the life story can be used as data for analysis and interpretation or to illustrate any number of theoretical positions. Within the life story, there may be segments of the life that can tell us more about the individual, and there also may be specific themes or issues that relate to the larger social issues of gender, class, race, and culture. Hence, the life story interview, as Atkinson (2012) posits, turns personal narratives into rigorous research endeavors.

A life story can cover the time from birth to the present as a way of understanding better the past and the present, sometimes shedding light on the future. It includes the important events, experiences, and feelings of a lifetime that the interviewee chooses to tell. The point of the life story interview is to learn the interviewee’s life stories as a whole and produce a first-person text in the words of the interviewee. This produced story is examined later for analysis and interpretation through the lens of your theoretical framework to address your research questions. Hence, our initial interest in the life story interview begins with a question like, “What is the story my interviewee wants to tell others and what meaning does it convey?” This allows us to just listen, understand, and accept the story without judgment. Thus the purpose of a life story interview is not to document categories of data (in other words, it is not paradigmatic in Bruner’s term, as we discussed in Chapter 1). Rather, it is to look for the wholeness in a person’s life. It is a retelling of “one’s life as a whole in the voice of the teller, as it is remembered and in a language that is deeply felt” (Atkinson, 2007, p. 237).

Yet it would be naïve to believe that we will get a person’s entire life story—that would require ongoing interviewing throughout our interviewee’s lifetime. So, the life story interview or biographical interview does not mean a review of every single event that ever took place in a person’s life, but, rather, it constitutes selective accounts of an individual’s life “to the extent to which it separates the relevant from the irrelevant” (Rosenthal, 1993, p. 61). Thus, the life story represents our interviewee’s overall construction of his or her past, present, and future, in which the interviewee makes decisions as to which experiences are relevant, or which experiences should or may be included or excluded (again, think about the three components of narrative thinking).

Life history researchers Goodson and Gill (2011) advise that it is crucial for us to share our research intentions and our methodology with the participants. Sharing the importance of the narrative inquiry methodology and our research purposes helps our participants understand and be aware of the value of their own voice and the importance of sharing their own experiences and stories. Goodson and Gill also ask us to directly confront our selective bias in the choice of our interviewees. For example, it is a common reaction among researchers to select interviewees whose story seems to appeal to the researcher and the researcher most sympathizes with. Hence, “the researchers are effectively telling their own stories” (Goodson & Gill, 2011, p. 37). To avoid this criticism, it is important to be able to justify and be transparent about how we came to select our participants, as O’Reilly and Parker (2012) noted earlier. Benefits of the life story interview are shown in Table 5.1 on the next page.

Narrative Interview Phases
I would recommend that we engage in the interview method for narrative inquiry with two distinct phases, which I call the narration phase and the conversation phase. The narration phase is an extensive narration by the interviewee/narrator, during which the interviewer restricts his or her interventions to the minimum while keeping the narration going, just as in open-ended interviews. We ask our interviewees to give a full narration of events and experiences from their own life, encouraging their narrative thinking processes. This narrative is not interrupted by questions, but can be encouraged by nonverbal expressions of interest and attention. It is best to let the interview take its course naturally to cover all that the interviewee wants to cover of his or her life. Thus, it is almost as if we intend to keep a “vow of silence” (Goodson & Gill, 2011, p. 39), although this does not mean that we will be completely unstructured or unprepared for this kind of an interview.

Table 5.1 Benefits of the Life Story Interview
1. A clearer perspective on personal experiences and feelings is gained, which brings greater meaning to one’s life.

2. Greater self-knowledge, a stronger self-image, and self-esteem are gained.

3. Cherished experiences and insights are shared with others.

4. Joy, satisfaction, and inner peace are gained in sharing one’s story with others.

5. Sharing one’s story is a way of purging, or releasing, certain burdens and validating personal experience.

6. Sharing one’s story helps create community and may show that we have more in common with others than we thought.

7. Life stories can help other people see their lives more clearly or differently and perhaps be an inspiration to help them change something in their life.

8. Others will get to know and understand us better, in a way that they hadn’t before.

9. A better sense of how we want our story to end, or how we could give it the “good” ending we want, might be gained.

icon downloadDownload Table as xlsx

icon downloadDownload Table as csv

icon downloadDownload Table as pdf

(Adapted from Atkinson, 2012, p. 120)

In the narration phase, our main role would be that of a listener and observer. I’d like to reference the renowned psychoanalyst Spence’s notion of “active listening” here. Spence (1982) posits that in psychoanalysis “active listening is required” (p. 279) in order to understand the patient’s narrative truth from an utterance that might be fragmentary, ambiguous, and disconnected. Although our interview session should not be confused with a counseling session, there is a lesson we can learn here. Just like psychoanalysts (see the section Narrative Inquiry in Psychology in Chapter 1), it is the researcher’s responsibility to listen with an ear tuned to sequence, coherence, continuity, meaningfulness, and transformation in our interviewee’s story. Narrative inquirers should have what I call a narrative competence of listening, borrowing from what Spence calls “the psychoanalytic competence” (p. 280). Active listening or a narrative competence of listening also comes with a keen observation of the way the interviewee talks, the use of body language, emotional expressions, feelings, pauses, and more. Through our narrative competence of listening, we try to sense, feel, see, hear, and even vicariously experience our narrator’s mental, intellectual, cognitive, and emotional engagement with the telling of his or her own life story.

Once the narration phase is complete, we can enter the conversation phase, although I do not intend to mean that these phases have to be done in a linear fashion, one after the other. The conversation phase is a period of semi-structured, in-depth questioning or interchange when the interviewer wants some clarifications on the issues presented in the first narration. In this phase, we also introduce additional topics related to our theoretical interests so that we can get more detail than the narrator’s original narrations may have provided (Spence, 1982). We use narrative questions that aim to elicit further narrations, that is, questions that invite more stories about our interviewee’s experiences. We ask our interviewee to elaborate in greater detail, if possible, on a previously mentioned experience, event, or period of his or her life. It is in this conversation phase where important interaction and collaboration between the interviewer and the interviewee take place. Goodson and Gill (2011) call it a “grounded conversation” (p. 40) where a collaborative meaning-making process between the interviewer and the interviewee occurs. Through our narrative questions, for which we can use other sources of data such as documentaries and historical data to shape what is told and retold in more detail, it is our goal to create a collaborative (re)construction of our interviewee’s story. Mishler (1986a) comments, “If we wish to hear respondents’ stories, then we must invite them into our work as collaborators, sharing control with them, so that together we try to understand what their stories are about” (p. 249).

The conversation phase is an in-depth interview process where questions and responses comprise the interview. That is, the interviewee’s responses and the interviewer’s relevant questions will continually inform the evolving conversation. The interview is no longer considered a unilaterally guided means of excavating information. The researcher is an active co-constructor rather than a passive collector or recorder of data (Gemignani, 2014). Although the interviewer’s aim is to encourage the interviewee to talk, the practice of narrative questioning, or the way the interviewer asks questions and the kinds of questions, will shape the evolving discourse (Paget, 1983). Narrative interview in the conversation phase, therefore, is viewed as discourse (Bertaux & Kohli, 1984; Merrill & West, 2009; Rosenthal, 1993) as well as dialogic interchange (Goodson & Gill, 2011). It involves the creation of meaning as both interviewer and interviewee respond “to features of the ongoing interaction, to nuances of mood, and to the content of the evolving conversation” (Paget, 1983, p. 69). During this conversation phase, solidarity between the interviewer and the interviewee will be established, as both try to understand important aspects of the interviewee’s life, which in turn will systematically create knowledge that illuminates human experience.

Narrative Interview Questions
Just because we let our interviewee talk as the central actor of the interview, it does not mean that we don’t need any interview techniques. On the contrary. For successful narrative interviews, good preparation is necessary. As narrative researchers, we have to think narratively about how we can generate interview data that will help us accomplish our research purpose and research questions, while leaving room for surprises that might come out of our narrative data. For successful interviews, critical advance preparation includes identifying whom you will interview and why, how, where, and when you are going to collect certain stories from your interviewee(s). Along with these careful advance preparations, knowing how to ask good questions is paramount in generating meaningful narrative data. For example, asking a “grand tour” question such as “Tell me the story of your life” can produce disappointing, brief, and even terse results, like what my student Bryan experienced. Thus, working out some questions beforehand is important (although you may not use them all), even while staying flexible and adaptable.

Then, what types of questions should we ask to elicit stories? As you probably know, the least helpful type of question is the yes-no question, unless you follow it right up with a “what,” “why,” or “how” question. More useful questions are the open-ended, descriptive, structural, and contrast questions with which you can get to the interviewee’s emotional level because they encourage more thoughtful and personally meaningful answers. Oral historian Charles Morrissey (1987) states that good interviewers:

phrase questions in open- ended language, avoid jargon, pursue in detail, ask for examples, defer sensitive questions until rapport is solid, let the interviewee set the pace of the interview and speak whatever explanations are foremost in the volunteered version of what occurred. (p. 44)

Here are some examples of interview questions (in case of high school experience):

How would you describe your high school experience? (open-ended)
What is the most memorable event that happened to you in your high school? How did/do you feel about it? (descriptive)
How did your high school experience differ from that of your time in middle school? (contrast)
You will ask many other follow-up, probing, clarifying questions, depending on the responses from the interviewee. One interview technique to which I want to bring your attention is a two-sentence format technique.

Two-Sentence Format Technique
Morrissey (1987) argues for the two-sentence format as an effective interviewing technique. The two-sentence format consists of a statement and a question, which works to explain the question before you ask it. For example:

Knowing as we do what happened and how it happened, we need to consider why the merger happened (statement). Would you recount the reasons why you supported the merger (question)? (p. 46)

Notice how the first sentence is a statement that predicates the question in the next sentence. The first sentence indicates that both the interviewer and the interviewee know about the merger. And then, notice how the wording in the second sentence closely repeats the wording in the first sentence. Additionally, the second sentence always asks only one question, practicing “the credo that respondents can deal most responsively—and unavoidably—with one question at a time” (p. 46). Here are some examples of the two-sentence format:

We’ve talked for a while about discipline in the schools. What do you do to avoid disciplinary punishments of students?
You’ve talked about many challenges you face as a new teacher. Can you tell me how you try to overcome those challenges?
See Table 5.2 for the characteristics of the two-sentence format interview technique.

Table 5.2 Characteristics of Two-Sentence Format Interview Technique
• The two-sentence format provides an interviewer with an opportunity to involve the interviewee in the co-creation of the document resulting from their interaction.

• It reaffirms the interviewee’s attentiveness and pursuit of detailed recollections.

• It contributes to the relationship between interviewer and interviewee as co-creators of life story or oral history.

• It vitalizes two basic interview qualities, rapport and collaboration.

• It transforms the interviewee’s silence into a narrative opportunity by having explained the rationale for the question (first sentence) and then having asked it (second sentence).

icon downloadDownload Table as xlsx

icon downloadDownload Table as csv

icon downloadDownload Table as pdf

Fieldwork
Some narrative researchers might think that understanding the interview method should be sufficient for the skilled practice of narrative inquiry. In fact, one of the blind reviewers’ comments for my book proposal was that the reviewer did not care about any other data collection methods than interviews. I respect the reviewer’s comment, but alas, how strongly do I disagree! In fact, I see more and more doctoral students not wanting to do the fieldwork for observations for their research because going out to a research field for observations is time-consuming. True. Plus, it is not easy to gain access to a research site.

Doing fieldwork for observation or participant observation is another core method of generating data for narrative inquiry, although I would not insist that it is a must. Coming from an educational background, I know my fellow narrative inquirers in education frequently use schools as their research sites; there they explore the stories of teachers and students. This is a way of living the inquiry. For example, as we learned in Chapter 3, Connelly and Clandinin (2006) posit that thinking narratively involves living in the research field, collecting data through observations or participant observations. They also identify three commonplaces of narrative inquiry—temporality, sociality, and place—as dimensions of narrative inquiry space. In particular, the third commonplace, place, is “the specific concrete, physical and topological boundaries of place or sequence of places where the inquiry and events take place” (Connelly & Clandinin, 2006, p. 480). Thus, place refers to your research site or a place where your participants’ experiences and events occurred in the past and/or are taking place in the present. Place or a series of places is your inquiry boundary that delimits the experiences or stories of your participants. In this life space, fieldwork will produce valuable data because “the specificity of location is crucial” (Connelly & Clandinin, 2006, p. 480) in narrative inquiry. We interact with our participants in a natural setting, developing a meaningful relationship with them. The social milieus of the location impact our participants’ lived experiences from which we can excavate more stories. As we do the fieldwork, we engage ourselves in keen attention, attuned to the life space of our participants.

Below, I present an excerpt of my dissertation, the part that describes how I gained access to the field. The school, which was my research site (place), was the temporary life space of the students (temporality) as the study participants and myself as the researcher, where social interactions (sociality) continuously evolved and was experienced by all of us. All the happenings that I could observe in the life space were recorded in my field texts as part of my data.

Gaining Access to the Research Field
Contact with Borderlands Alternative High School started in spring 2002 when I took one of the research method classes as a part of my doctoral study. The principal of the school at that time, Mr. Vee, was my classmate. He willingly gave me permission to use his school as a research site for my term paper. I was given an opportunity to do classroom observations in Ms. Dee’s class, twice a week for three hours per visit for two months. The assignment for the course was to find out what was going on in the classroom, so I tried to record almost everything I saw and heard as meticulously as possible in writing. I also interviewed Ms. Dee at her house over dinner. She provided me with her personal life story and her valuable insight on her school, Borderlands, and alternative education in general. The assignment became the groundwork for my dissertation.

I revisited the school a year later in May, 2003 to explore the possibility of using the school as my dissertation research site. Mr. Vee had already informed me that he had resigned his position due to some difficulties he encountered with the school district. Keeping the information in mind, I made an appointment with the new principal, Mrs. Steadman. Our appointment was set for 9 o’clock in the morning on the ninth of May, 2003. I arrived 10 minutes early with a little bit of anticipation and trepidation: what if the new principal doesn’t want her school to be studied. I could feel some butterflies in my stomach. The administrative assistant asked me to have a seat and told me that Mrs. Steadman was meeting with a parent at the moment. I was glad that I had a time to take a deep breath and relax a little bit before I got to meet the principal. While waiting, I started looking at the banners glued on the wall:

You Are the Author of Your Own Life Story.

An Education Is Your Key to Success.

A Little Respect Goes a Long Way.

Respect. Learn it. Earn it.

Your Teacher’s Goal Is Simple: To Help You Reach Yours.

While I was reflecting on the implied meanings of these quotes in the banners, a Hispanic girl came into the office abruptly. She was wearing a mini-skirt, leopard-skin patterned shoes and a hat. Her style was very attractive and fashionable. She handed something to the administrative assistant in an impolite manner and said “School’s DUMB!” And then, she left the office. People who were in the room, such as the administrative assistant, secretary to the principal, security guard, and school nurse, looked at each other and shrugged their shoulders.

To me, the comment was very intriguing. Why is school “dumb”? Is it her personal opinion or does everybody here think so? If school is “dumb,” how can an education be a key to success? While wondering about the relationship between schooling and the student’s perception about schooling, I found myself more motivated and excited about doing research at Borderlands.

Mrs. Steadman became available 30 minutes after the appointment time. After introducing myself, I gave her a brief summary of my dissertation prospectus. She seemed interested. When I told her that one of the aspects I wanted to look at in the school was the hidden curriculum of the school, she said, “Oh, in this school, almost everything is done in the hidden curriculum.” “Oh, really?” I didn’t dare to ask what she meant by “hidden curriculum.” I thought I would probably figure that out later. That was a part of my research.

“You bet,” and then, she continued. “Your study sounds very interesting. We’ll be happy to have you here.” “Oh, thank you very much. Thank you very much.” I was happy like a kid at a candy store. I even bowed. Mrs. Steadman smiled at me. “By the way, can I have a copy of your dissertation proposal?” “Sure. Here it is. I brought one for you. Do you think I need to contact the school district too?” “No, you don’t need to.”

To my surprise, my access to the school was gained without difficulty. Mrs. Steadman was very intelligent, down to earth, and most of all, very kind...

I spent most of my observation time in classes that my six interviewees were taking: ninth grade class, tenth grade social studies class, senior English class, and economics class. Interactions between the teacher and students, what they teach and learn in class, how they react to each other, what is happening in classroom, what they say and what they do were documented in my field notes.

Upon the principal’s permission and after an IRB approval, I started my fieldwork in August 2003, which lasted for 13 weeks till December 2003, Monday through Thursday, about five to six hours each day. The total observation time I spent at the research site was between 260 and 312 hours. I started my observation in Mrs. Emm’s classroom, where senior English and Economics were taught. I chose her class first because she personally told me that I would be welcomed any time to her class. She was easy going and did not seem to be bothered by my presence... (Kim, 2005, pp. 48–51)

I was lucky to be able to identify my research site and gain access to it without difficulty. I was allowed to observe and explore the daily lives of my participants, including adults working in that site, without the need for negotiation. However, we should understand that gaining access to a field site can involve challenges and negotiations. Most writings about access center on issues of gatekeepers in addition to practical and ethical challenges of entering fieldwork sites (see Reeves, 2010, for example).

Access to a research site is a process of negotiations, which includes selecting, entering, continuing in the field, and exiting (Bondy, 2012). Although I had relatively “easy” access, once I got to the field, I had to constantly negotiate my position in multiple situations because I was a “stranger” to the population. As I discussed in Chapter 3, I was mistaken as a “spy” by a student. Another time when I was writing my field notes in a classroom, a couple of students came up to me and tried to look at my notes, wondering if I was writing something bad about them. This incident made me realize that writing field notes in front of the participants was a “risky” business that may endanger the relationship and trust I was trying to build up with them. Bondy posits that the role of researcher as stranger means “the researcher must be aware of and negotiate his or her position within the research setting delicately” (p. 582). This was true throughout my research process. Therefore, as Bondy states, we should carefully examine “the connections between how we access research settings and the results of our research. Each part represents a crucial piece of the research puzzle, and one that provides a more complete understanding of a given social setting” (p. 587).

The Art of Observation—Also Known as Attention
When we are in the field, what are we supposed to observe? Do we have observation skills? Do we even have enough patience for an extended observation? Aren’t we living in the age of inattention where people are texting, instant messaging, or tweeting while being with their friends, behaviors that are sometimes favorably termed multi-tasking?

Speaking of inattention, I stumbled upon an article with the headline “How to End the Age of Inattention” in The Wall Street Journal (Finn, 2012) on a Sunday morning. The article was about an innovative class that Yale’s School of Medicine has been offering for the last decade to help future doctors learn the art of observation. This program, called Enhancing Observational Skills, was created by collaboration between Yale medical school faculty member Dr. Irwin Braverman and Linda Friedlaender, curator of education at the Yale Center for British Art. The impetus to create the program was their increasing concern about how the art of detailed, careful observation is getting short shrift in an age when physicians rely heavily on high-tech imaging and tests, which results in many misdiagnoses. The so-called museum intervention was created to hone medical students’ observational skills. Students are assigned to a painting that they examine for 15 minutes, recording all they see. This is followed by a group discussion about their observations. The purpose is to help students improve their ability to detect important details for a better diagnosis while withholding their initial assumptions and a hasty interpretation of what they see. This program has been so successful that it has expanded to more than 20 other medical schools, including Harvard, Columbia, and Cornell (see also Chapter 1 for narrative medicine).

One of the strategies these programs use to develop observational skills is Visual Thinking Strategies (VTS), developed by Harvard-trained cognitive researcher Abigail Housen and veteran art educator Philip Yenawine. VTS employs a discussion facilitation protocol as participants examine and discuss a carefully selected art image. The process helps participants develop observation, language, and thinking skills such as evidence-based reasoning. VTS uses visual art to help learn to express opinions shaped from detailed observations of the art with evidence to back them up. It is being used in higher education (on college campuses and in medical education), as well as in K-12 settings, and is typically taught in collaboration with art museums and different disciplines (Yenawine & Miller, 2014). Students are asked to respond to the very basic meaning-making question, What’s going on in this image? A second question, What did you see that makes you say that? is used when students make interpretive comments or express an opinion. Every response is paraphrased by the facilitator. Over time, students have been shown to develop the following skills that I would say are what we need for good observation and attention:

Look carefully at complex, intriguing works of art
Engage in thoughtful, extended examinations of what they find
Back up their ideas with evidence
Listen to and consider the views of others, agreeing, disagreeing, or building on what they hear
Hold a variety of interpretations as possible (Yenawine & Miller, 2014, p. 3)
For more information on Visual Thinking Strategies, you can visit www.vtshome.org. I believe that it is not just medical doctors who need to pay particular attention to their observational skills. We narrative researchers also need to hone observational skills to better understand our participants’ stories. We need to be keen observers of our participants’ life worlds in order to retell their stories in full, closer to their reality. In addition, observational skills are needed beyond data collection in the field, especially when analyzing data. They are particularly important because visual narrative inquiry is becoming more prevalent, as discussed in Chapter 4.

Observer’s Paradox
As we consider the role and importance of observation during our fieldwork, we should also be aware of the effect that the observer’s presence may have on the data generated, which is what Labov calls the observer’s paradox. According to Labov (1972), the aim of research (especially in linguistic research) is “to find out how people talk when they are not being systematically observed; yet we can only obtain this data by systematic observation” (p. 209). Labov’s observer’s paradox emphasizes the importance of collecting data in a natural setting because the observer’s presence, if viewed as an artificial arrangement, might influence how participants behave and act in the research setting, which is referred to as the Hawthorne Effect2 or the Observer Effect.

The paradox is that it is important to collect data in a natural setting, but the systematic recording of data, for instance, the observer writing field notes while observing, or taping or video-recording a conversation, may affect how the participant acts or what the participant says.

My student, Jodie, visited me in my office to ask questions about her interview data. She said, “I had a wonderful interview with my participant, today. My participant shared a lot of information about the challenges she’s experiencing as a PE teacher. But what’s more interesting is that she talked more seriously about her personal insights even after I thought we were done with the interview! I mean, as soon as I turned off my iPhone recorder, she started talking more. She said to me, ‘Well, since we are not recording any more, I can talk more freely about what I really think.’ Is it common?” I assured Jodie that it is indeed common that interviewees would talk more after a recorder is turned off, and sometimes it can be more interesting than what is recorded. Jodie was perplexed, “Really? Then, would I gather more meaningful data if I don’t record the interview at all? Actually, some of my participants didn’t like it when I turned on the audio-recorder at the interview. They became a little bit nervous.”

Jodie was encountering the observer’s paradox. I’m sure you have been in Jodie’s situation or you may experience it once you start interviewing or observing. Gordon (2012) posits that the observer’s paradox is inescapable because we have to inform our research participants of recording for ethical reasons. Even so, according to Speer (2008), researchers should work to “eliminate extraneous, research-induced ‘contaminants’” (p. 511), a term that refers to the presence of an “observer,” be it a person, recording device, or both.

There are possible ways to minimize the observer’s paradox. First, it is important for us to spend an extended period at a research site or to be in a natural setting where we as observers are treated as a “natural” part of the life space. We can accomplish this by “being there” for an extended period of time, and working as a participant observer, if possible, which will help us establish trustworthy relationships with the participants. Xu and Connelly (2010) call such efforts of becoming a natural part of the setting field-based narrative inquiry. Second, at the beginning of the recording, we should engage in conversational moments with our participant to the point when the recorder is “forgotten” (Speer, 2008). Third, we should embrace the observer’s paradox instead of trying to escape it (Gordon, 2012). That is, rather than treating the presence of a researcher and/or a recorder as “contaminants” (Gordon, 2012, p. 300), we should pay greater attention to the interconnections among methods, context, and data, keeping in mind the various ways the data might be influenced by the existence of the researcher/observer/recorder.

Artifacts: Cabinets of Curiosities or Cabinets of Wonder
Recently, the Beach Museum of Art at my institution had a special exhibition titled Museum of Wonder, honoring Kansas State University’s sesquicentennial celebration (February 12, 2013). For this exhibition, inspired by the traditional cabinets of curiosities or cabinets of wonder (wunderkammern), the museum collected over 100 objects from different departments at KSU, consisting of an eclectic mix of objects to represent the university’s past, present, and future. The exhibition included objects such as wheat-related products, machines, equipment, books, maps and drawings, prints and paintings, decorative items, furniture, clothing and textiles, and animal fossils and skeletons. Each object had a story of its own representing the diverse fields of research and knowledge pursued at KSU in the last 150 years (http://beach.kstate.edu/explore/exhibitions/museumofwonder.html).

As I enjoyed looking closely at each object displayed at the exhibition, I started imagining what kind of story each one might hold. I wondered about the owner or maker of each object, a person who could tell me an interesting story of the thing and what meaning it might have. My wonderings did not stop there, though. As I looked at the entire exhibition, I began to wonder how this collection of artifacts could be used as a research method. I started seeing much potential in the cabinet of curiosities. How about collecting objects as data from our storytellers, which will go with the life story and lived experiences that our storytellers relay to us? How about creating a cabinet of curiosities full of objects that our storytellers are willing to share?

The traditional cabinets of curiosities or cabinets of wonder started in the Baroque period (16th and 17th centuries) with well-to-do European travelers who began collecting extraordinary items from foreign countries they visited, such as natural specimens, items made of precious materials, and instruments of technology. These extraordinary objects or artifacts were stored in special cupboards or actual rooms for viewing enjoyment to inspire the viewer’s imagination, curiosity, and wondering about art, other cultures, and the natural world. These groupings and displays became the foundation of the modern museum (MacLure, 2006).

One of the best known cabinets of curiosities is the Museum Wormianum, established by Ole Worm, a seventeenth-century Danish archaeologist, embryologist, natural philosopher, physician, and teacher (Purcell, 2004). Rosamond Purcell,3 who is a photographer, artist, and scientist, was recently commissioned to re-create Ole Worm’s museum at the Harvard University Science Center. Purcell (2004) wrote about how Worm collected artifacts from the daily lives of peoples from the circumpolar region, including baskets, spears, and tools, not to mention natural objects and ethnographic and archaeological artifacts such as coins, corals, fossils, magnifiers, mirrors, stuffed gulls, a polar bear, and so on.

By now, you have probably guessed where I am going with this discussion. I am suggesting that we collect artifacts with the concept of the cabinet of curiosities as a way to excavate further stories from our research participants. The items can be personal journals, diaries, letters, books, photographs, paintings, personal belongings, formal and informal documents, student homework assignments, or any other objects that the storytellers would like to share that are related to the telling of their story. So, we could create our own cabinets of curiosities or cabinets of wonder as part of our research data, with which we tell more stories.

Alas, I am not the original adopter of the cabinet of curiosities as a qualitative research method. MacLure (2006) has explored how a baroque method such as trompe l’oeil4 painting (visual illusion in art) and the cabinets of curiosities that were popular in the Baroque age can be used in postmodern qualitative research. MacLure posits that the baroque method can conjure up possibilities for spaces where difference, wonder, and otherness can emerge. Following Lambert’s (2004) argument for a “return of the baroque” that has recently arrived in fields including art, cultural theory, philosophy and aesthetics, surrealism and literary theory, MacLure posits that a baroque method can be used in qualitative research to “resist clarity, mastery and the single point of view” and to “honor the obligation to get entangled in the details and decorations, rather than rise above them” (p. 731) (see MacLure (2006) for more detailed characteristics of the baroque method).

Here, our interest is in one of the baroque methods, the cabinet of curiosities or wunderkammer, for use as an aid to provoke more stories from the storytellers for narrative inquiry. The cabinet of curiosities represents wonder, which is a preeminently baroque effect/emotion (Lambert, 2004), or “the contemplation of otherness” (Mauriès, 2002, p. 249). Objects in the cabinet, concealed in nested drawers, shelves, niches, and boxes, would represent our wondering about the storyteller’s past, present, and future, evoking our imagination, empathy, and understanding of the other. Indeed, the cabinet of curiosities is the experience of wonder, “designed to spark connections” (MacLure, 2006, p. 738), opening up more stories to whoever experiences it: the researcher, the researched, or the reader.

I posit that collecting artifacts in the spirit of creating a cabinet of curiosities is an important narrative method in which we narrative inquirers should engage. As Miller (2010) states, “Stuff does not merely reflect who we are, but in many respects it actually creates us in the first place” (p. 40). A cabinet of curiosities is full of such “stuff.” As you can see, then, there is much to discover, explore, and search through for meaning in the artifacts that our storytellers might share with us. We wonder, mull over, and possibly take another journey with the artifacts collected in the cabinet of curiosities in the hermeneutical excavation of stories through our narrative inquiry.

Visual Data
Today, you see that images and visual artifacts are ubiquitous, and they are produced on a daily basis (e.g., websites, photo images, advertisements, and signs). For most people, such visual images in daily life are taken for granted, and they are not subjects of systematic inquiry for scholarly activities. However, it is our understanding that images convey multiple messages that provide insights into social phenomena (Weber, 2008). We don’t always notice the importance of what we see, nor do we attempt to systematically analyze it. It is “the paying attention, the looking and the taking note of what we see that makes images especially important to art, scholarship, and research” (Weber, 2008, p. 42, italics in original). Qualitative researchers, therefore, should take advantage of the wide sweep of visual data sources available in society (Margolis & Pauwels, 2011) and pay attention to such visual data sources. If you recall, we discussed in Chapter 4 how visual-based narrative inquiry is becoming increasingly prevalent these days.

Visual data include a wide range of visual forms, including films, video, photographs, drawings, cartoons, graffiti, maps, diagrams, cyber graphics, signs, and symbols (Weber, 2008). Margolis and Pauwels (2011) suggest that one of the most essential choices we have to make in visual research is whether to use existing visual material (“found” visuals) as primary data for research, or to generate visual data as a researcher.

In fact, if you’re interested in visual-based narrative inquiry, it will be helpful to understand that there are three types of visual data to gather: (1) found materials; (2) researcher-generated visual data; and (3) respondent-generated visual data (Margolis & Pauwels, 2011). Found materials are the ones that already exist, or materials that have been produced by other researchers for similar or different research purposes. Researcher-generated visual data means the researcher selects events and phenomena to initiate the production of visual data.

Finally, respondent-generated visual data, which is an increasingly popular data type in the social and human sciences, is generated when participants are asked to produce their own data in a visual form. For example, participants take photographs of their lives over a short time span of a week or two and tell stories about those photographs over time. This method is called Photovoice (see Chapter 4), “a strategy that relies on informants to produce images” (Bell, 2013, p. 145). These photographs are made with and by participants as well as of them. The researcher still needs to analyze the respondent-generated data, hence “it is important to note that the respondent-generated material, while offering a unique (insider) perspective, is never an end product, but just an intermediate step in the research” (Margolis & Pauwels, 2011, p. 8).

Why, then, do we use visual images? According to Knowles and Sweetman (2004), there are three approaches to the usage of visual images within social and human science research. First, we use images as representations of reality and documentation of already existing phenomena or events from a realist perspective. Photojournalism or taking images while doing fieldwork would be an example of this approach. Second, we use images as evidence to construct reality from a poststructuralist perspective. For example, we can use photography to problematize important social issues such as homelessness, immigration, or prisons. An example of this approach would be Richard Ross’s work on Juvenile-in-Justice, which is shown in Chapter 6. Finally, we use existing images in the archives as texts for a semiotic analysis (or semiology). The existing images can be analyzed to uncover their social and cultural significance that needs to be deconstructed (Pauwels, 2011).

To gain more insights into visual methods, I would highly recommend that you look into the fields of visual sociology and visual anthropology (e.g., http://visualsociology.org and http://www.societyforvisualanthropology.org), as they have done much of the pioneering work on image-based methodologies.

(Digital) Archival Data
Closely related to visual data, another set of technology-driven data that narrative inquirers can use is (digitally) archived data. We can use archival data as a supplementary set of data to support the story we are retelling as we delve into personal stories and histories, making the personal story social. Archival data allow “the individual to write his or her own story of the past—combining his or her own story with the stories represented in the archives” (Morgan-Fleming, Riegle, & Fryer, 2007, p. 82).

In the past, it was challenging to use archival data with primary source materials preserved in the traditional way, not in the digital form. Traditional archival data had limited access and the labor to go through it was costly and time-consuming. However, access to digital archival materials has never been as easy as it is today, transcending limits of time and space with availability on the Internet, and with many digital archives open to the public. These online archives provide us with an opportunity to access a wide range of personal stories, folk tales, audio files, and video files about any genre. We can use primary sources of a particular historical time and an individual’s personal experience of that event.

Morgan-Fleming, Riegle, and Fryer (2007) provide wonderful digital archival resources for us in their appendix (p. 98). For example, their institution, Texas Tech University’s Southwest Collection, has more than 4,500 tapes of 2,800 interviews, covering a wide range of disciplines such as agriculture, medicine, education, religion, politics, and more. Notably, there is also a movement that demands the principle of open access to all knowledge. The Open Content Alliance (http://www.opencontentalliance.org/), for example, with an effort to build “a digital archive of global content for universal access,” has digitized more than 1 million books in OpenLibrary (http://openlibrary.org). Their associated organization, archive.org (http://archive.org), has innumerable video, audio, and text files available to us.

The impact of digitally available resources on the way we conduct our narrative research in an age of open access is huge, leading us to rethink our understanding of what constitutes data and how we collect data.

Conclusion: Excavating Stories as Data
In this chapter, we looked into narrative data collection methods that would elicit narrative thinking to help us in excavating stories. The methods described included interviews, fieldwork, observation (attention), visual data, artifacts (cabinets of curiosities or cabinets of wonder), and (digital) archival data. However, there are other methods available. As Barthes (1975) points out, narrative is present in every age, in every place, and in every society, in an “almost infinite diversity of forms” (p. 251) such as spoken or written language, fixed or moving images, gestures, fables, history, dramas, stained-glass windows, news items, comics, cinema, and more. Therefore, we should use imagination and creativity to find as much meaningful data as possible to accomplish whatever research purpose we have for narrative inquiry. I would say that what is most important to remember during the data collection period is to be an active listener, attentive observer, and empathic person with integrity.

Questions for Reflection
Why is it necessary to give up the authoritative position of a researcher and be a humble listener who honors the voice of your participant?
What types of interview are you going to conduct? How many informants will you interview to fit your research design? How would you justify your method of sampling and saturation?
Can you list narrative research methods that you are going to use for your narrative inquiry? What are they?
Is there any new, creative data collection method you have come up with? If so, how would you justify and theorize it?
Activities
1.
Let’s write an interview guide. Beginning with your “grand tour” question, jot down all of the topics and areas you want to cover in the interview. Then, write a series of questions for each of those topics or areas. After that, organize the questions in order for topical flow. Share them with your classmates and justify how these questions will help you with addressing each of your research questions.
2.
Imagine your interview situation and create your interview questions in the two-sentence format based on your research questions.
3.
Find a person you can interview for 30 minutes using the interview questions and guide that you have just created. Transcribe the interview.
4.
Visit a nearby museum with your classmates. Pick one painting for your observation. Observe the painting for 15 minutes and record the details that you see. What can you tell about the painting?
5.
Find more online archival sources and grow the list provided here.
Online Archival Resources
http://archive.org

http://www.opencontentalliance.org/

http://openlibrary.org/

http://daln.osu.edu/ (Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives)

http://www.saadigitalarchive.org/firstdays (South Asian American Digital Archive, sharing stories from South Asians about their first day in the U.S.)

http://911digitalarchive.org (Collection of stories, images, documents, and videos of September 11, 2011)

http://www.indiana.edu/~libarchm/ (The Archives of Traditional Music; audiovisual archive that documents music and culture from all over the world)

http://www.vietnam.ttu.edu/oralhistory/ (The Oral History Project of the Vietnam Archive)

http://www.digital.swco.ttu.edu/Oral_History/oralhistory.asp (audio, photo, text collection of racial relations in the American Southwest)

http://aton.ttu.edu/ (Archive of Turkish Oral Narrative)

http://loc.gov/ (U.S. Library of Congress)

http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/webarchive/archiving-datasets.htm (UK National Digital Archive of Datasets [NDAD])

Digital storytelling (the Center for Digital Storytelling in California): www.storycenter.org

Notes
1. See Mason (2010) for an in-depth discussion on the issues of sample size and saturation in PhD studies.

2. Hawthorne Effect is a term that refers to a phenomenon in which the participants’ behavior is affected by the observer’s presence. The term came from the Hawthorne experiments done by researchers from the Harvard Business School, whose aim was to find out worker productivity, job satisfaction, and workplace organization at the Hawthorne Works of the Western Electric Company. Gillespie (1991) contends that the findings from the Hawthorne experiments were skewed to benefit the company, hence knowledge was “manufactured” in specific social, institutional, and ideological contexts, in which meaning was imposed rather than discovered (p. 4).

3. Photographer and collage artist Rosamond Purcell was commissioned to re-create Ole Worm’s museum for an exhibition opened September 27, 2004, and ran until January 2005 at the Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments, Harvard University Science Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

4. MacLure (2006) explains that the trompe l’oeil is one of many baroque devices that “invoke the unavoidably compromised and problematic nature of vision” (p. 736) of an observer/viewer/reader, leading to an “inability to tell the difference between representation and reality, original and copy” (p. 734).